---
permalink: /blog/tooling-for-empowerment-and-peacebuilding
layout: post
title:  "Web-based Tooling for Inclusion and Empowerment"
short-title: "Tooling for Empowerment"
date: 2015-04-10 12:04:30
author: jen
categories: inclusion empowerment tooling justice peace peacebuilding
---

There is an increasingly well-recognized and vivid need among peacebuilders for
increased access to technological tools that can advance their efforts.
However, peacebuilders across sectors are confronted by resource, time, and
capacity constraints that often make it difficult or impossible to efficiently
use technological tools in their program design, implementation, and analysis.
<!--more-->
Additional challenges to peacebuilding more generally include creating programs
that are [context-relevant, inclusive, broadly accessible, and which have
widespread participation from affected
communities](http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/67/499). There
are also challenges specific to using technology in conflict and post-conflict
contexts, such as weakened or destroyed mobile infrastructures, legal
restrictions, insecure environments, and [ethical
considerations](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.techchange.org%2F2014%2F09%2F23%2Fethics-ict-technology-peacebuilding%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGAXxp1_M2iQ58WVhEExjLJK582NQ).

JustPeace Labs addresses these challenges by offering peacebuilders a robust, user-friendly online development platform for creating targeted mobile applications.

### Context

Recognizing the need for context-specific technology use, we will make it
easier for peacebuilders to unleash the power of technology in ways that are
designed for and with the input of the peacebuilding community to ensure each
application is situation-specific. Our development platform will also address
difficult challenges specific to using technology in post-conflict settings,
such as the ethics and security of using mobile apps in peacebuilding work, and
the inequalities in access to technological tools amongst local communities.

### Access

By creating a robust and easy-to-use tool for mobile application development,
more organizations and peacebuilders will have access to the benefits of
technology. Based online and designed for non-technical users, the application
will increase access to technological tools amongst traditionally harder to
reach constituencies, such as
[women](http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2014/05/women-ict-africa-new-digital-ga-201452210244121558.html)
and rural communities. Grassroots organizations will not need special software,
equipment, or technical capacity to use our platform. Anyone, anywhere, can use
it.

### Inclusion & Participation

It will also allow peacebuilders to reach larger groups of people, collect
better information, engage in more in-depth analysis, and do so quickly, in
peacebuilding contexts where timing is critical and resources are scarce. With
more people able to design mobile apps specific to their context and goals,
more people will be included in the peace process. This will generate a new
social infrastructure where communities feel more connected to peacebuilding
programs, and more invested in seeing their success.

### Empowerment

Our app development platform is designed to empower local civil society
organizations, which may lack the capacity to design similar tools in-house, to
be able to use technology in their work. By increasing direct access to
peacebuilding programs, local civil society groups and communities will become
empowered participants in creating peaceful societies, thereby increasing the
[legitimacy of technology](http://howtobuildpeace.org/blog/cindy-chungong1/) in
fragile post-conflict environments and making information sharing horizontal
(between beneficiaries) rather than hierarchical (from beneficiaries to
donors/implementers).

### How it works

The development platform will allow peacebuilders to quickly design, create,
and implement mobile applications to support their work. For example, an
organization working on rule of law or governance issues will be able to gather
information from local communities by designing a survey application using the
platform. Another organization would be able to use the interface to create a
mobile application to inform communities of upcoming elections information,
town-hall meetings, security updates, or other critical information that has
traditionally been difficult for peacebuilders to disseminate quickly and
efficiently across communities or in rural areas. The interface could also be
used by peacebuilders working in the field to securely collect and send data
about crimes and human rights violations, the environment, or local economies.
Or it could be used to create a central hub of information and communication to
facilitate cooperation between peacebuilding organizations. The types and uses
of the apps that can be developed on our platform are many--we will develop
features and add-ons to be able to address the most common app types, as well
as provide opportunities for customization.

The platform will also include tools for easy data analysis. Peacebuilders will
be able to gather data from their mobile applications or other sources, such as
government open data. It will be easy to analyze information and create visuals
to support findings and reports, improve advocacy and awareness-raising
efforts, or measure the impact of their programs.

The interface will be intuitive and will require very little training and no
technological expertise to operate. The applications will be web-based, and
therefore will work across mobile platforms (such as Android, iOS, FirefoxOS,
and others). There will be built-in features unique to peacebuilding contexts,
such as language support, image/shape support (for example to allow
communication with illiterate users), encryption, verification, and data
analysis. We will also offer opportunities to customize the platform to the
needs of specific organizations through an extendable plugin system.

Our project will use the global reach of the web and its latest developments to
build a platform that everyone can use, from any device or system. In
particular, our project will take advantage of the following technologies:

* **HTML5**. The web was conceived as a "universal" medium with no walled gardens owned by major platforms or corporations. This idea informs the premise of our project. We will be using HTML5 and the latest web technologies to create a global reach, making sure we leverage features like offline-capability (Appcache, service workers) to provide service to areas with low-connectivity. Our tools will work on every device.

* **SMS-based interfaces.** Using services like Twilio or Frontline SMS, our platform will allow peacebuilders to reach people living in low or 0-connectivity areas.

* **Modular, pluggable architecture.** We intend to design the system with a modular architecture so that once the project is open-sourced people and organizations can easily build plugins for their use-cases.

* **Integration with existing tools and workflows.** Peacebuilders will not have to learn a whole new application and interface to utilize this tool. Instead it can be integrated with existing software like Google Docs or LibreOffice.

In this way, JustPeace Labs brings the power of technological tools to the
global community of peacebuilders and in turn increases inclusivity and local
ownership of peacebuilding initiatives. We welcome your ideas and feedback.
Please contact us at [jen@justpeacelabs.org](mailto:jen@justpeacelabs.org).

