---
permalink: /blog/2015-05-18-where-to-from-here
layout: post
title:  "Build Peace 2015: Where to from here?"
short-title: "Build Peace 2015: Where to from here?"
date:   2015-05-18 22:04:30
author: jen
categories: tech technology data tooling justice peace peacebuilding
---

We’ve finally had a moment to collect our thoughts after a stimulating weekend
in Cyprus at the Build Peace 2015 conference. <!--more-->We were blown away by the
enthusiasm of conference participants and the wealth of expertise and ideas
being shared! We were also left with a number of burning questions...

### Where are all the programmers?

Many conference participants highlighted similar challenges to using technology
in peacebuilding. Some of these include needing to decide between targeting
"low-level" versus “high-level” technology (e.g., feature vs. smartphones), how
to process and manage large quantities of data and avoid fragmentation and how
to seamlessly reach all of the different devices out there.

Some of these challenges can be addressed by utilizing open technologies like
Firefox OS and proven solutions to process big data that are already successful
in the private sector. Governments and organizations around the world are
discovering the benefits of using [open
data](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_data) and are developing insights on
how to
[us](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.wired.com%2F2014%2F08%2Fdat%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHGrbU67MaEh5o2Y2P3NHSbRdcCwg)[e](http://www.wired.com/2014/08/dat/)[
this data for
good](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.wired.com%2F2014%2F08%2Fdat%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHGrbU67MaEh5o2Y2P3NHSbRdcCwg).
We believe open data should be ubiquitous in peace tech, so that organizations
around the world can build on it. Also, the Internet of Things is making a big
splash in the tech scene, and—although it is still in its infancy—we believe
that it could contribute meaningfully to peacebuilding in the near future.

Our Build Peace discussions would have benefited enormously from the input of
engineers and programmers that have experience designing and implementing these
kind of systems. There wasn’t a large presence of technologists or programmers
at Build Peace to provide input on these and other challenges. Incentivizing
them to become integral members of the peace tech community will be an
important next step, followed by targeted technical discussions on potential
solutions.

### What are our ethical guidelines?

There was an overwhelming consensus about a need for the ethical application of
technology in our peacebuilding work. Participants all seemed to agree that "do
no harm" should be a central tenet of this field. However, more discussion is
needed on what exactly that means and how exactly that plays out in practice.
We need to delve into creating and applying ethical guidelines in practice. It
is critical that these guidelines, like our projects, are scalable and do not
become diluted as tech projects are adopted and adapted in various
(post-)conflict situations.

This is especially true given the discussion about the creation of a peace tech
industry that relies on private companies (see a debate about this
[here](http://letthemtalk.org/2015/05/08/peacetech-industry/)). There are
important ethical implications of monetizing peacebuilding work through private
companies, including the collection of personal data as users come online in
post-conflict countries. One very significant risk is that post-conflict
communities will [pay for the technology with their
data](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/26/facebook-isnt-charity-poor-pay-by-surrending-their-data)
-- after all, there has to be a profit incentive somewhere. How these companies
then use that data may not be regulated or may be used in ways that are
ethically dubious. Current laws and corporate social responsibility guidelines
may need to be updated to take ethical and legal considerations into account.

### What about security?

Working in post-conflict situations always involves security risks, as does the
widespread use of information technology. Systems can be hacked, users can be
targeted (by governments or others), and information can be used by spoilers to
foment unrest and violence. As a community, security should be a primary
consideration in developing peacebuilding programs that utilize technology. How
can we best ensure that our tech tools are secure? What steps do we need to
take to ensure that our tools are used securely, and how do we deal with the
possible exploitation of our tools by peace spoilers? We should work to develop
a set of good practices for working securely in this field.

### What do we do about changing regulatory frameworks?

Finally, how do peacebuilders ensure that their work does not violate laws or
regulatory frameworks? As technology changes and expands, so do the laws and
regulatory frameworks that govern their use. These include changes to criminal
laws, laws governing freedom of expression, website registration requirements,
laws restricting encryption, laws restricting anonymization tools and many
others.

Moreover, technology is increasingly being used by courts and prosecutors in
investigations and trials--sometimes limiting the potential for peacebuilding.
For example, as peacebuilders turn to technology, [repressive states in turn
cite that technology use as evidence of criminal
activity](http://buildingpeaceforum.com/2015/03/the-risks-of-speaking-out-online/).

How can peacebuilders ensure that their tech tools do not violate these legal
and regulatory frameworks? How do we as a community help shape frameworks to
promote openness and security? A peacebuilder working across jurisdictions will
need to account for multiple legal systems and potential risks. Those of us
designing programs with users across the globe will also need to ensure that
our users understand the legal implications of their work. That doesn’t mean
just signing an informed consent form, but really helping users understand the
legal framework that governs technology use in their country and how they can
best protect themselves.

### Moving forward

As we move forward with our projects as a community, reflection on these issues
will be critical. They are fundamental to a sustainable peace tech industry
(whether "private," “public,” or somewhere in between).

JustPeace Labs hopes to drive discussion and thought on these questions and
challenges. We are building relationships with programmers who can help solve
some technological challenges by using the latest advances in computer science.
We are currently working on a white paper addressing the issue of CSR, ethics
and peace tech. We are also engaged in research on regulatory frameworks and
relevant laws.

